Autogenerate
============

runic can compare a *desired* schema described in Python (the
``SchemaManifest``) with the *actual* schema currently in your graph and
generate migration scripts for the difference — no hand-written Cypher
required.

----

How it works
------------

1. You declare the target schema as a :class:`~runic.migrate.manifest.SchemaManifest`
   object and pass it to ``context.configure()`` in ``env.py``.
2. ``runic revision --autogenerate`` calls ``CALL db.indexes()`` and
   ``CALL db.constraints()`` to read the live schema, then diffs it against
   the manifest.
3. It generates an ``upgrade``/``downgrade`` body and writes a new revision
   file marked ``# AUTOGENERATED — review before applying; cannot detect renames``.
4. **Always review the generated file before applying it.**  Autogenerate
   cannot detect renames and may generate incorrect ``drop`` + ``create``
   pairs in place of a rename (see :doc:`../limitations`).

Declaring a SchemaManifest
--------------------------

Import the manifest classes from ``runic``:

.. code-block:: python

   from runic.migrate.manifest import (
       FulltextIndex,
       MandatoryConstraint,
       RangeIndex,
       SchemaManifest,
       UniqueConstraint,
       VectorIndex,
   )

Build the manifest:

.. code-block:: python

   TARGET = SchemaManifest(
       range_indexes=[
           RangeIndex("Person", "email"),
           RangeIndex("Person", "name"),
           RangeIndex("KNOWS", "since", rel=True),
       ],
       fulltext_indexes=[
           FulltextIndex("Article", ("title", "body")),
           FulltextIndex("Review", ("text",), language="german"),
       ],
       vector_indexes=[
           VectorIndex("Document", "embedding", dimension=1536, similarity="cosine"),
       ],
       constraints=[
           UniqueConstraint("NODE", "Person", ["email"]),
           MandatoryConstraint("NODE", "Person", ["name"]),
       ],
   )

Configuring env.py for autogenerate
-------------------------------------

Pass ``target_manifest`` to ``context.configure()``:

.. code-block:: python

   # runic/env.py
   import os
   from runic.migrate import context
   from runic.migrate.adapters import create_adapter
   from runic.migrate.manifest import RangeIndex, SchemaManifest, UniqueConstraint

   TARGET = SchemaManifest(
       range_indexes=[RangeIndex("Person", "email")],
       constraints=[UniqueConstraint("NODE", "Person", ["email"])],
   )

   adapter = create_adapter(
       "falkordb",
       url=os.getenv("FALKORDB_URL", "falkor://localhost:6379"),
       graph_name=os.getenv("FALKORDB_GRAPH", "my_graph"),
   )
   context.configure(adapter, target_manifest=TARGET)

Generating a migration script
------------------------------

Run ``runic revision --autogenerate``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ runic revision --autogenerate -m "add person constraints"
   Created revision: runic/versions/b2c3d4e5_add_person_constraints.py  [CANDIDATE — review before applying]

Open the generated file:

.. code-block:: python

   def upgrade(op) -> None:
       # AUTOGENERATED — review before applying; cannot detect renames
       op.create_range_index("Person", "email")
       op.create_constraint("UNIQUE", "NODE", "Person", ["email"])

   def downgrade(op) -> None:
       # AUTOGENERATED — review before applying; cannot detect renames
       op.drop_constraint("UNIQUE", "NODE", "Person", ["email"])
       op.drop_range_index("Person", "email")

.. important::

   The ``[CANDIDATE — review before applying]`` notice in the CLI output is a
   reminder that the generated file must be reviewed before being applied.
   **Never apply an autogenerated migration to production without reviewing it.**

Using ``runic check`` in CI
----------------------------

``runic check`` exits with code 1 if the live schema has drifted from
``target_manifest``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ runic check
   Schema up-to-date.

   $ runic check
   Pending schema changes (run `runic revision --autogenerate -m "..."` to generate):
     + op.create_range_index("Order", "placed_at")

Add it to your CI pipeline to fail the build when uncommitted schema changes
are present:

.. code-block:: yaml

   # GitHub Actions example
   - name: Check schema drift
     run: |
       FALKORDB_URL=${{ secrets.FALKORDB_URL }} \
       FALKORDB_GRAPH=${{ secrets.FALKORDB_GRAPH }} \
       runic check

What autogenerate detects
--------------------------

Autogenerate compares canonical keys for each schema object type:

+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Object type   | Key                                       |
+===============+===========================================+
| Range index   | entity type, label, property              |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Fulltext index| label, properties (tuple)                 |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Vector index  | label, property                           |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Constraint    | kind (UNIQUE/MANDATORY), entity, label,   |
|               | properties (tuple)                        |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------+

Drop order in the generated ``upgrade`` follows the dependency rule:
constraints first, then indexes.  Create order is the reverse: indexes
first, constraints second (because UNIQUE constraints require a prior range
index).

What autogenerate does NOT detect
-----------------------------------

See :doc:`../limitations` for a full list.  Key gaps:

* **Renames** — a renamed property or label appears as ``drop + create``,
  which would delete and recreate the index but would not rename data.
* **Property type changes** — FalkorDB does not expose property type
  information via ``db.indexes()``; runic cannot diff on type.
* **Node/relationship data** — only schema objects (indexes and constraints)
  are compared.
* **Index options drift** — changes to HNSW parameters (``m``,
  ``ef_construction``) on an existing vector index are not detected.

Manifest classes reference
---------------------------

.. autoclass:: runic.migrate.manifest.SchemaManifest
   :members:
   :show-inheritance:

.. autoclass:: runic.migrate.manifest.RangeIndex
   :members:
   :show-inheritance:

.. autoclass:: runic.migrate.manifest.FulltextIndex
   :members:
   :show-inheritance:

.. autoclass:: runic.migrate.manifest.VectorIndex
   :members:
   :show-inheritance:

.. autoclass:: runic.migrate.manifest.UniqueConstraint
   :members:
   :show-inheritance:

.. autoclass:: runic.migrate.manifest.MandatoryConstraint
   :members:
   :show-inheritance:
